<!--Title: Minimal Introduction to Go-->
<!--Date: 2016-04-08 12:00-->
<!--Category: Dev-->
<!--Tags: Go-->

# Why Go?

Golang is becoming more and more popular in recent years because of its speed combined with modern programming language features such as garbage collection, in-language support of concurrency and improved memory safety (in comparison to C). In essence, it is a Google's attempt to revise and update C. That being said, Go is still very low level and it fits best for system and high-performance applications.

Here I want to share my experience on starting with Go.

# Program Structure

For starters, we have to install Go compiler and its infrastructure. In my opinion, [these instructions](https://golang.org/doc/install) are quite self-sufficient.

Another, easier way to try Go is [Playground](https://play.golang.org/) which allows executing programs through a web interface. The interface, however, has some restrictions and is not guaranteed to behave the same as on local machine (e.g. "time" module always returns the same value).

If you open Playground, you will see a default template for a Go program. It consists of three main parts:

* __Package definition.__ Package is a unit of modularity in Go. It defines a separate name space and is similar, for example, to module in Python.

```go
package main
```

* __Imports.__ Package definition is followed by import statements, which enable functionality from other packages. Same principle as in other languages like C or, again, Python.

```go
import "fmt"
```

* __Function definitions.__ In general, functions are defined the following way. Note that types are defined after the name of a variable, not before (as in C).

```go
func name(param1 type1, param2 type2) (return_type1, return_type2) {
    ...
}
```

For example, simple echo function will look like this:

```go
func echo(text string) string {
    return text  # No semicolon!
}
```


This gives us a basic structure of a program. Now to the details.

# Basic Syntax

## Variables

There are 3 ways to define a variable in Go:

* Full definition - can be used without initialization (which will lead to zero-initialization)

```go
var foo int  // foo is 0 now
```

* If an initialization is given, the type definition can be omitted

```go
var bar = 1
```

* There is also a shorthand for this case

```go
bar := 1
```

The pointer syntax is exactly the same as in C:

```go
var p *int = &bar
baz := *p
```

## Control flow

Loops can be written, again, in three ways. 

* Full declaration

```go
for i := 1; i <= 10; i++ {
    // do something
} 
```

* Equivalent to `while`:

```go
for i <= 10 {
    // do something
}
```

* Infinite loop (`while-true`):

```go
for {
    // do something
}
```

Branching is performed by `if/else if/else` statement:

```go
if i < 10 {
    // first option
} else if i == 10 {
    // second option
} else {
    // third option
}
```

Alternatively, it could be rewritten using `switch/case/default`:

```go
switch {
case i < 10:
    // first option
case i == 10:
    // second option
default:
    // third option 
}
```

## Arrays and slices

In Go, there are two types of sequence data structures: static, i.e. common arrays, and dynamic, called slices.

The array syntax is following:

```go
var a [3]int  // array of 3 integers, zero-initialized

b :=  [3]int{0, 1, 2} // initialized array

a[0] = b[0]  // element access
```

Slices are a dynamic alternative to arrays, that is, they can be changed in size (appended to) and copied:

```go
var s = make([]int, 3)  // create an integer slice of size 3

s[0] = 1  // element access similar to arrays
s[1] = s[0]

s = append(s, 2)  // built-in append function

// copy
e := make([]int, len(s))
copy(e, s)
```

## Maps

Map is an [associative array](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Associative_array), similar to Python's dictionary or Ruby's hash. In essence, it is a set of key-value pairs:

```go
m := map[string]int{"foo": 1, "bar": 2}

m["bar"] = 2  // change value of a given key
m["baz"] = 3  // add a new key-value pair

fmt.Println(m["foo"])  // access a value by the key
```

## Basic OO - structures and methods

The structure syntax:

```go
type foo struct {
    a int
    b int
}
```

Structure instances in Go can be used as simple objects. They can get methods as well:

```go
func (f *foo) sum() int {
    return f.a + f.b
}

func (f *foo) diff() int {
    return f.a - f.b
}
```

```go
f := foo{a: 5, b: 3}

s := f.sum()
d := f.diff()
```

