---
title: "Notes on: ConTExT - Leakage-Free Transient Execution"
date: 2019-05-31 18:00
layout: post
headerImage: /assets/images/2019-05-31-context.png
tag:
- security
- Spectre
- speculative attacks
category: blog
author: me
---

[ConTExT: Leakage-Free Transient Execution](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.09100.pdf) - Schwarz et al.

Software defenses aginst Spectre-type attacks are generally slow (up to several times slower than native) and often protect against only one class of attacks.
ConTExT strives to improve on both vectors by implementing the defense in hardware.

The paper proposes an extension to CPU architecture.
The core idea is to create a new type of pages - non-transient pages - that cannot be accessed during speculative execution.
The responsibility of the application developer then is to define which data goes into the non-transient pages and which stays in normal memory.

# Overview

The core idea is to make secret data inaccessible to transient instructions by providing two new hardware features: non-transient pages and a "non-transient" bit in CPU registers.
ConTExT ensures that the CPU cannot access the memory within the non-transient pages and it cannot execute an instruction if at least one of its operand registers has the non-transient bit set.

The features are used as follows.
Initially, the application developer annotates the secret data that she does not want to be touched by speculative execution.
A ConTExT-aware compiler then parses the annotations and allocates the secret data in a separate section.
At runtime, the process loader requests the OS to mark the pages that belong to this section as non-transient.

To ensure that speculative execution cannot access the secret data while it is being processed (i.e., when it is stored in CPU registers), ConTExT adds an extra bit to every CPU register and automatically sets it upon every load from non-transient pages (the register becomes "tainted").
The taint is propagated further between the registers when the value is copied or used as an argument in an arithmetic operation.
The taint is not propagated, however, into memory:
If the secret is copied into a non-secret part of memory, this situation is considered a bug in the program.
To ensure that it does not happen accidentally when the compiler does register spilling, the spills occur on a separate stack allocated in the non-transient section of memory.

# Evaluation

ConTExT is implemented in two versions: as a simulation in [Bochs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bochs) and as a software emulator (ConTExT-light).

The simulation was used for measuring the performance impact on system calls.
Because the modifications to the OS are minimal - only page type management and preservation of register taints at context switches - the execution time of syscalls has barely changed (less than 1% slowdown).

ConTExT-light was used to measure the impact on application performance.
In the experiment, they annotated keys in OpenSSL's RSA and measured the encryption time.
Here, the overhead is much more significant - 71%, which is somewhat comparable to software defenses, although I would typically expect a better performance from a hardware extension.
However, they claim that if the application is protected against *all* Spectre-type attacks, the total cost of defense would be much higher, thus making ConTExT a viable option.
It is probably true, although no one ever experimentally verified it.

# My opinion and grumbling

_Note: there's a good chance that I've misunderstood something in the paper and some parts of the text below are entirely wrong._

Generally, it is an interesting approach, but it is rather niche.
Quite a bit of responsibility is outsourced to the application developers, and the security generally relies on the correctness of the code they write.
On the bright side, though, ConTExT provides a holistic defense against all Spectre-type attacks, so it could be worth it.

As of the issues in the paper itself, my main concern is the performance evaluation.
In my opinion, the measured performance overhead - 71% - should be taken with a good pinch of salt.
First, RSA is just one benchmark, and we don't know what would be the result for other applications.
The comparison becomes even weaker if we consider that the numbers that the paper reports for software defenses are average numbers.
For example, in my recent [paper](https://arxiv.org/pdf/1905.10311.pdf), we measured the slowdown of RSA (though, a different implementation of it) when protected by one of such defenses - Speculative Load Hardening -and the overhead was only 20%, which is much lower than the reported 62%.
Second, ConTExT-light is both over- and underapproximation.
It overapproximates the overhead from non-transient memory, but, at the same time, it does not emulate a potentially significant source of overhead - register tainting.
Therefore, it's hard to judge how representative it is.
